<span id="_Toc449114424" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc322076999" class="anchor"></span></span>Fundamentals of Testing
=====================================================================================================================

Keywords

-   Debugging, requirement, review, test case, testing, test objective,
    exhaustive testing, Confirmation testing, re-testing, exit criteria,
    incident, regression testing, test basis, test condition, test
    coverage, test data, test execution, test log, test plan, test
    procedure, test policy, test suite, test summary report, testware

Learning Objectives for Fundamentals of Testing

1.1 What is Testing?

FL-1.1.1 (K1) Identify the major objectives of testing

FL-1.1.2 (K2) Differentiate testing from debugging

FL-1.1.3 (K2) Identify the test activities and respective tasks within
the fundamental test process.

1.2 Why is Testing Necessary?

FL-1.2.1 (K2) Give reasons why testing is necessary by giving examples

FL-1.2.2 (K2) Describe why testing is part of quality assurance and give
examples of how testing contributes to higher quality

FL-1.2.3 (K2) Distinguish between errors, defects and failures.

FL-1.2.4 (K2) Distinguish between the root cause of a defect and its
effects

1.3 Seven Testing Principles

FL-1.3.1 (K2) Explain the seven testing principles.

1.4 The Psychology of Testing

FL-1.4.1 (K1) Identify the psychological factors that influence the
success of testing.

FL-1.4.2 (K2) Clarify the difference in the mindset required for testing
and development activities.

<span id="_Toc157235486" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc157236732"
class="anchor"><span id="_Toc157237033" class="anchor"><span
id="_Toc157486982" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc157560971"
class="anchor"><span id="_Toc157907297" class="anchor"><span
id="_Toc157911746" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc158182105"
class="anchor"><span id="_Toc158430124" class="anchor"><span
id="_Toc158433107"
class="anchor"></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span>

What is Testing? {#what-is-testing .Heading2new}
----------------

Testing is an activity which helps ensure the right level of quality in
software. This includes positive tests to demonstrate that functionality
works as required, and negative tests to ensure product robustness is at
the required level.

ISTQB defines testing as:

The process consisting of all lifecycle activities, both static and
dynamic, concerned with planning, preparation and evaluation of software
products and their related work products to determine that they satisfy
specified requirements, to demonstrate that they are fit for purpose,
and to detect defects.

Testing starts day one in all projects, both with new development or
maintenance work. It includes planning what we must test with
traceability from requirements to test planned and later executed.
Historically, a common perception of testing was that it only consisted
of running tests, i.e., executing the software. Actually, this is a part
of testing, but not all of the testing activities.

Deciding how much testing is enough should take the level of risk into
account, along with project constraints such as time and budget. Testing
should provide metrics to stakeholders to make informed decisions about
the release of the software. See more on metrics in chapter 5.

### 1.1.1 The major objectives of testing

Testing has the following objectives:

-   Validating that the system under test works as required

-   Verifying that all specified requirements have been fulfilled

-   Gaining confidence about the level of quality

-   Finding defects

-   Preventing defects.

-   Providing information for decision-making

The thought processes and activities involved in designing tests early
in the life cycle (verifying the test basis via test design) can help to
prevent introducing defects into code. Reviews of documents (e.g.,
requirements), identification and resolution of issues also helps to
prevent defects appearing in the code.

### 1.1.2 Differentiate testing from debugging

Debugging and testing are two different activities. Tests are planned
and executed to obtain the objectives of testing as listed in section
1.1.1. When a test is executed defects can be found.

Debugging is the development activity that a developer uses to analyze
what in the software is causing the defect and subsequently, removing
this cause of failure. Debugging is the responsibility of a developer.
Confirmation testing is then executed first by the developer at the
component level and subsequent by a tester at the system test level to
ensure that the corrective actions resolve the failure.

Ordinary defects are fixed and confirmation testing is executed.
Additional a regression test is executed, to ensure all other parts of
the software still works as expected. The magnitude of the regression
test is based on the risk of the area where the defect was identified.

1.1.3 Test activities and respective tasks within the fundamental test
process

The most visible part of testing is test execution. But to be effective
and efficient, test plans should also include time to be spent on
planning the tests, designing test cases, preparing for execution and
evaluating results. The fundamental test process consists of the
following main activities:

-   Test planning, monitoring and control

-   Test analysis

-   Test design

-   Test implementation

-   Test execution

-   Evaluating exit criteria and reporting

-   Test closure activities

Although logically sequential, the activities in the process may overlap
or take place concurrently. Tailoring these main activities within the
context of the system and the project is usually required.

**Test Planning, monitoring and Control **

Test planning is the activity of defining the objectives of testing and
the specification of test activities in order to meet the objectives and
mission.

Test control is the ongoing activity of comparing actual progress
against the plan, and reporting the status, including deviations from
the plan. It involves taking actions necessary to meet the mission and
objectives of the project. In order to control testing, the testing
activities should be monitored throughout the project. Test planning
takes into account the feedback from monitoring and control activities.

Test planning, monitoring and control tasks are defined in Chapter 5 of
this syllabus.

**Test Analysis **

Test analysis is the activity during which general testing objectives
are evaluated and identified.

The test analysis activity has the following major tasks:

-   Reviewing the test basis (such as requirements, software integrity
    level (risk level), risk analysis reports, architecture, design,
    interface specifications)

-   Evaluating testability of the test basis and test objects

-   Identifying and prioritizing test conditions based on analysis of
    test items, the specification, behavior and structure of the
    software

-   -   -   -   

**Test Design**

Test design is the activity that occurs as the result of test analysis,
leading to the creation of tangible test conditions and test cases.

The test design activity has the following major tasks:

-   Designing and prioritizing high level test cases

-   Identifying necessary test data to support the test conditions and
    test cases

-   Designing the test environment setup and identifying any required
    infrastructure and tools

-   Creating bi-directional traceability between test basis and test
    cases

**Test Implementation**

Test implementation is the activity where test procedures or scripts are
specified in a particular order, and that other information and the
environments needed for test execution are prepared.

Test implementation has the following major tasks:

-   Finalizing, implementing and prioritizing test cases (including the
    identification of test data) o Developing and prioritizing test
    procedures, creating test data and, optionally, preparing test
    harnesses and writing automated test scripts

-   Creating test suites from the test procedures for efficient test
    execution

-   Verifying that the test environment has been set up correctly

-   Verifying and updating bi-directional traceability between the test
    basis and test cases

-   -   -   -   -   

**Test Execution**

Test execution is the activity where test procedures or scripts
specified during the test implementation activity are run.

Test execution has the following major tasks:

-   -   Executing test procedures either manually or by using test
    execution tools, according to the planned sequence

<!-- -->

-   Logging the outcome of test execution and recording the identities
    and versions of the software under test, test tools and testware

-   Comparing actual results with expected results

-   Reporting discrepancies as incidents and analyzing them in order to
    establish their cause (e.g., a defect in the code, in specified test
    data, in the test document, or a mistake in the way the test
    was executed)

-   Repeating test activities as a result of action taken for each
    discrepancy, for example, re-execution of a test that previously
    failed in order to confirm a fix (confirmation testing), execution
    of a corrected test and/or execution of tests in order to ensure
    that defects have not been introduced in unchanged areas of the
    software or that defect fixing did not uncover other defects
    (regression testing)

**Evaluating Exit Criteria and Reporting **

Evaluating exit criteria is the activity where test execution is
assessed against the defined objectives. This should be done for each
test level (see Section 2.2).

Evaluating exit criteria has the following major tasks:

-   Checking test logs against the exit criteria specified in test
    planning

-   Assessing if more tests are needed or if the exit criteria specified
    should be changed

-   Writing a test summary report for stakeholders

**Test Closure Activities**

Test closure activities collect data from completed test activities to
consolidate experience, testware, facts and numbers. Test closure
activities occur at project milestones such as when a software system is
released, a test project is completed (or cancelled), a milestone has
been achieved, or a maintenance release has been completed.

Test closure activities include the following major tasks:

-   Checking which planned deliverables have been delivered

-   Closing incident reports or raising change records for any that
    remain open

-   Documenting the acceptance of the system

-   Finalizing and archiving testware, the test environment and the test
    infrastructure for later reuse

-   Handing over the testware to the maintenance organization

-   Analyzing lessons learned to determine changes needed for future
    releases and projects

-   Using the information gathered to improve test maturity

Why is Testing Necessary? {#why-is-testing-necessary .Heading2new}
-------------------------

We test because it makes good business sense. Finding and fixing a
defect during testing and before release costs much less than if the
defect is found in production. If the risk for failure in software is
low, or the consequence when failure appears are low, we could consider
to test less exhaustively.

### 1.2.1 Reasons why testing is necessary 

We test to reduce the risk of failure in software when we use it. When
we have a risk of software not working at an expected quality level,
testing is used to reduce this risk or confirm we have a failure which
must be fixed before release. If software has defects causing failures
when it is used, the consequence can be fatal for the user and company.

Rigorous testing of systems and documentation can help to reduce the
risk of problems occurring during operation. When defects found are
corrected and verified by confirmation testing before the system is
released for operational use, the quality level of the production
software will be higher.

Software testing may also be required to meet contractual or legal
requirements, or industry-specific standards. (should we include
reference to nay standards here?)

### 1.2.2 Quality Assurance and Testing

With the help of testing, it is possible to measure the quality of
software in terms of defects found, for both functional and
non-functional software requirements and characteristics (e.g.,
reliability, usability, performance, efficiency, maintainability and
portability).

For more information on non-functional testing see Chapter 2; for more
information on software characteristics see “Software Engineering –
Software Product Quality” (ISO 25010).

Testing can give confidence in the quality of the software if it finds
few or no defects. A properly designed test that passes reduces the
overall level of risk in a system. When testing does find defects, the
quality of the software system increases when those defects are fixed
and verified by confirmation testing.

Lessons should be learned from previous projects. By understanding the
root causes of defects found in other projects, processes can be
improved, which in turn should prevent those defects from reoccurring
and, as a consequence, improve the quality of future systems. This is an
aspect of quality assurance.

Testing should be integrated as one of the quality assurance activities
(i.e., alongside development standards, training and defect analysis).

### 1.2.3 Errors, defects and failures

A human being can make an error (mistake), which produces a defect
(fault, bug) in the program code, or in a document. If a defect in code
is executed, the system may fail to do what it should do (or do
something it shouldn´t), causing a failure. Defects in software, systems
or documents may result in failures, but not all defects do so.

Defects occur because human beings are fallible and because there is
time pressure, complex code, complexity of infrastructure, changing
technologies, and/or many system interactions.

Failures can be caused by environmental conditions as well. For example,
radiation, magnetism, electronic fields, and pollution can cause faults
in firmware or influence the execution of software by changing the
hardware conditions.

### 1.2.4 Root cause of a defect and its effects

Defects can be analyzed to identify the root cause as to why and where
they were introduced, and how to avoid similar defects to be introduced
in the future. e.g. lack of domain knowledge caused a misinterpretation
when implementing a part of the software. The effect of this defect
might be fatal, or it might only be cosmetic.

Seven Testing Principles {#seven-testing-principles .Heading2new}
------------------------

A number of testing principles have been suggested over the past 50
years and offer general guidelines common for all testing.

### 1.3.1 The Principles

**Principle 1 – Testing shows presence of defects**

Testing can show that defects are present, but cannot prove that there
are no defects. Testing reduces the probability of undiscovered defects
remaining in the software but, even if no defects are found, it is not a
proof of correctness.

**Principle 2 – Exhaustive testing is impossible**

Testing everything (all combinations of inputs and preconditions) is not
feasible except for trivial cases. Instead of exhaustive testing, risk
analysis and priorities should be used to focus testing efforts.

**Principle 3 – Early testing**

To find defects early, testing activities shall be started as early as
possible in the software or system development life cycle, and shall be
focused on defined objectives.

**Principle 4 – Defect clustering**

Testing effort shall be focused proportionally to the expected and later
observed defect density of modules. A small number of modules usually
contains most of the defects discovered during prerelease testing, or is
responsible for most of the operational failures.

**Principle 5 – Pesticide paradox**

If the same tests are repeated over and over again, eventually the same
set of test cases will no longer find any new defects. To overcome this
“pesticide paradox”, test cases need to be regularly reviewed and
revised, and new and different tests need to be written to exercise
different parts of the software or system to find potentially more
defects.

**Principle 6 – Testing is context dependent**

Testing is done differently in different contexts. For example,
safety-critical software is tested differently from an e-commerce site.

**Principle 7 – Absence-of-errors fallacy**

Finding and fixing defects does not help if the system built is unusable
and does not fulfill the users’ needs and expectations

The Psychology of Testing {#the-psychology-of-testing .Heading2new}
-------------------------

People and projects are driven by objectives. People tend to align their
plans with the objectives set by management and other stakeholders, for
example, to find defects or to confirm that software meets its
objectives. Therefore, it is important to clearly state the objectives
of testing at the different test levels.

### 1.4.1 Psychological factors that influence the success of testing

People are driven by goals, either explicit or implicit. It has been
shown that testers find more defects with defined goals (e.g. Explore
the user interface for finding inconsistencies). Therefore, test leaders
shall assign goals when assigning testing tasks to testers.

When providing and accepting feedback, the developer or author of a
document may interpret failures as criticism against himself instead as
a means to improve the product quality and reduce product risks. When
testers and reviewers communicate about failures in a constructive way,
they can avoid negative feelings or misinterpretation by developers and
authors.

Looking for failures in a system requires curiosity, professional
pessimism, a critical eye, attention to detail, good communication with
peers, and experience on which to base error guessing.

The tester and test managers need good interpersonal skills because
communication problems may occur, e.g. testers might be seen only as
messengers of bad news.

However,T there are several ways to improve communication and
relationship in teams:

-   Language (considering culture, religion, and gender)

-   Communicate findings on the product in an objective, factual way
    without criticizing the person who created it, e.g., write objective
    and factual incident reports and review findings

-   Show understanding and share the feelings of another.

-   Confirm that the other person has understood what you have said and
    vice versa.

In addition, test managers shall consider

-   Set up teams with common goals

-   Intercultural differences

### 1.4.2 Tester vs. Developer mindset

The mindset to be used while testing and reviewing is different from
that used while developing software.

-   Developers mindset is related towards construction and creativity of
    software development

-   Testers mindset is related towards challenging the software to find
    deviations

Good developers can switch to the tester mindset. The benefit of
applying both mindsets is the ability to identify defects early.
However, switching mindset is difficult because developers are often
biased towards what they created. Therefore, a degree of independence
between development and testing often makes the tester more effective at
finding defects and failures.

Levels of independence can be defined as shown here from low to high:

1.  Tests designed by the person(s) who wrote the software under test

2.  Tests designed by another person(s) from the development team

3.  Tests designed by a person(s) from a different internal
    organizational group (e.g., an independent test team) or test
    specialists (e.g., usability or performance test specialists)

4.  Tests designed by a person(s) from a different external organization
    or company (e.g., outsourcing or certification by an external body)

<span id="_Toc367105207" class="anchor"></span>

Testing Throughout the Software Life Cycle – 190 mins. 
=======================================================

Keywords

-   Alpha testing, beta testing, black-box testing, code coverage,
    Commercial Off-The-Shelf (COTS), component testing, driver, field
    testing, functional requirement, functional testing, Impact
    analysis, integration, integration testing, interoperability
    testing, iterative development model, incremental development model,
    load testing, maintainability testing, maintenance testing test
    approach, model non-functional requirement, performance testing,
    robustness testing, security testing, stress testing, structural
    testing, stub, system testing, test environment, test level,
    test-driven development, user portability testing, reliability
    testing, usability testing, acceptance testing, validation,
    verification, V-model., white-box testing

Learning Objectives for Testing Throughout the Software Life Cycle

2.1 Software Development Models

FL-2.1.1 (K2) Explain the relationship between software development
activities and test activities in development life cycle.

FL-2.1.2 (K1) Identify reasons why software development models must be
adapted to the context

of project and product characteristics

2.2 Test Levels

FL-2.2.1 (K2) Compare the different levels of testing from the
perspectives of objectives, test objects, test targets (e.g. software
characteristics), related work products, responsibilities, and types of
defects and failures to be identified.

2.3 Test Types

FL-2.3.1 (K2) Compare functional, non-functional, structural testing

FL-2.3.2 (K1) Recognize that functional and structural tests occur at
any level

FL-2.3.3 (K2) Compare the purpose of confirmation testing and regression
testing

2.4 Maintenance Testing

FL-2.4.1 (K2) Identify triggers for Maintenance testing

FL-2.4.2 (K2) Describe the rote of impact analysis and Maintenance
testing

-   -   -   -   -   

2.1 Software Development Models 
--------------------------------

-   Over time different types of development models have been used.
    Waterfall is an example of sequential model. It is one of the first
    models developed to describe development activities aiming at
    transforming requirements into a final product. Another example of
    sequential model is the V–Model.

-   Although variants of the V-model exist, within ISTQB the V-model has
    four test levels. Each of the four test levels on the right of the
    V-model corresponds to development activities on the left in
    the V-model.

-   The four test levels used in this syllabus are:

<!-- -->

-   Component testing

-   Integration testing

-   System testing

-   Acceptance testing

<!-- -->

-   In practice, a V-model may have more, fewer or different levels of
    development and testing, depending on the project and the
    software product. For example, there may be component integration
    testing after component testing, and system integration testing
    after system testing.

-   Incremental development is the process of establishing requirements,
    designing, building and testing a system, done as a series of
    shorter development cycles. An increment, added to others developed
    previously, forms a growing partial system. Those increments should
    be tested.

-   Iterative development usually breaks the project into a large number
    of smaller iterations. An iteration is a complete development loop
    of defining, building and testing. The resulting executable product
    produced by an iteration may be tested at several test levels during
    each iteration.

-   Examples of incremental and iterative development models are Rapid
    Application Development (RAD) and Rational Unified Process (RUP) and
    agile development models. One can distinguish number of different
    methods and frameworks within Agile like eXtreme Programing, which
    is a development model, and Scrum, which is a management framework
    for doing agile projects.

### 2.1.1 Relationship between software and test activities 

-   Testing does not exist in isolation; test activities relate to
    corresponding software development activities. Different development
    life cycle models need different approaches to testing.

-   In any life cycle model, there are number of characteristics of
    testing – development relations like:

<!-- -->

-   For every development activity there is a corresponding testing
    activity

-   Each test level has test objectives specific to the related
    development level.

-   The analysis and design of tests for a given test level should begin
    during the corresponding development activity. Start as early as
    possible with testing activities.

-   Testers should be involved in reviewing documents as soon as drafts
    are available in the development life cycle.

### 2.1.2 Software development models in context (K1)

-   Software development models must be adapted to the context of
    project and product characteristics. Based on the project goal, the
    type of software, and the product risk assessment, a model is
    set up. For example, a small internal administrative system will be
    treated differently than a safety-critical system like an
    automobile’s brake control system. This will also influence a
    test approach.

-   It is possible to combine or reorganize development and test levels
    depending on the nature of the project or the system architecture.
    For example, for the integration of a Commercial
    Off-The-Shelf (COTS) software product into a system, the purchaser
    may perform integration testing at the system level (e.g.,
    integration to the infrastructure and other systems, or
    system deployment) and acceptance testing (functional and/or
    non-functional, and user and/or operational testing.

2.2 Test Levels {#test-levels .ListParagraph .Heading2new}
---------------

-   Testing does not exist in isolation. The test activities relate to
    the corresponding software development activities. Different
    software development life cycle models (SDLC) have different
    approaches to testing. Identify for every SDLC the needed test
    levels and test types.

-   For each of the four test levels the following characteristics can
    be identified:

<!-- -->

-   Objectives for a specific test level;

-   Work product(s) (test basis) needed for deriving test cases;

-   Test object i.e., what is being tested;

-   Typical defects and failures found during testing;

-   Test targets to be met;

<!-- -->

-   Besides the general test objectives, each test level has its own
    specific objectives and

-   different viewpoints in testing take different objectives
    into account.

-   For example, in component, integration and system testing, the main
    objective may be to cause as many failures as possible so that
    defects in the software are identified and can be fixed.

-   In acceptance testing, the main objective may be to confirm that the
    system works as expected to gain confidence that it has met
    the requirements.

-   During operational testing, the main objective may be to assess
    system characteristics such as reliability or availability.

-   Ideally, each test level should have its own dedicated
    test environment.

### 2.2.1 Different levels of testing (K2)

-   Component Testing

-   Component testing searches for defects in and verifies the
    functioning of components that are separately testable. It may be
    done in isolation from the rest of the system, depending on the
    context of the development lifecycle and the system.

-   -   As test basis for deriving test cases for component testing, one
    or more of the following work products can be used:

<!-- -->

-   Component requirements;

-   Detailed design;

-   Data model;

<!-- -->

-   Typically, component testing occurs by accessing the code. Typical
    test objects are:

-   Components, units, modules, program;

<!-- -->

-   Objects;

-   Classes;

-   Database modules;

<!-- -->

-   Component testing may include testing of functionality and specific
    non-functional characteristics such as resource-behavior (e.g.,
    searching for memory leaks) or robustness testing, as well as
    structural testing (e.g., decision coverage).

-   A common approach is that the developer who wrote the code will do
    the component testing. The developer fixes the defects when found,
    without formally managing these defects. Another approach to
    component testing is to use a test-driven development (TDD) or
    test-first approach. This highly iterative approach requires the
    creation and automation of test cases before coding. The first step
    is developing test cases, then building and integrating small pieces
    of code, and executing the component tests correcting any
    defects found. This iteration cycle stops when all component
    tests pass.

-   Component testing usually uses a development environment such as a
    unit test framework. Tools like debuggers, stubs, drivers and
    simulators like mock objects are commonly used in this kind of
    test environment.

-   When meeting the specified test target, the test process will move
    on to the next test level.

-   Integration testing

-   With integration testing, testers concentrate solely on testing the
    integration itself. For example, if module A is to be integrated
    with module B the testing will focus on the interactions between the
    modules, and not on the functionality of the individual modules as
    done during component testing. Both functional and structural
    approaches may be used.

-   Integration testing searches for defects in interfaces and/or
    interactions:

<!-- -->

-   Between components

-   With different parts of a system, such as:

-   The operating system;

-   File system and hardware;

-   Interfaces between systems;

<!-- -->

-   There may be more than one level of integration testing.

-   The size of the test objects under test may vary depending on the
    test phase:

<!-- -->

-   Component integration testing, done after component testing in a
    development environment, tests the interactions between
    software components.

-   System integration testing, done after system testing, tests the
    interactions between different systems or between hardware
    and software. In this case, the developing organization may control
    only one side of the interface. This might be considered as a risk.

-   Business processes implemented as workflows may involve multiple
    systems on different platforms. Cross-platform issues may be
    significant and time consuming to solve.

<!-- -->

-   The greater the scope of integration, the more difficult it becomes
    to isolate defects in a specific component or system. This may lead
    to increased risk and additional time for solving
    integration problems.

-   As test basis for deriving test cases for integration testing,
    use i.e. one of the following work products:

<!-- -->

-   Software and system design;

-   Architecture;

-   Workflows;

-   Use cases;

<!-- -->

-   Typical test objects are:

<!-- -->

-   Subsystems;

-   Database implementation;

-   System infrastructure;

-   Interfaces;

-   System configuration and configuration data;

<!-- -->

-   Systematic integration test strategies may be based on:

<!-- -->

-   the system architecture, such as top-down and bottom-up;

-   functional tasks;

-   transaction-processing sequences;

-   some other aspect of the system or components;

<!-- -->

-   In order to ease fault isolation and detect defects early,
    integration should normally be incremental rather than “big bang”.
    Testing of specific non-functional characteristics, e.g. performance
    may be included in integration testing.

-   When working in agile projects applying the mentioned strategies
    with continuous integration implemented is important.

-   At the component integration level, developers primarily do
    this testing. At the system integration level, testers primarily do
    this testing. Ideally, testers should understand the
    implemented architecture. If planning for integration tests before
    components are built, those components can be built in the order
    required for most efficient testing.

-   Doing integration testing at the component level, the development
    environment is the most obvious. When doing system integration
    testing, the environment must have interfaces to the other
    related systems. Organizing this type of testing can be challenging
    in large organizations, as the various. systems may have different
    owners and may use different test teams. It is even possible that
    external, third party systems are involved. Access, authorization,
    security and use of consistent test data sets can be complex.
    Organizing this kind of integration test may take a lot of time in
    relation to the execution of the test.

-   System Testing

-   System testing searches for defects in the behavior of a
    whole system/product. System testing should investigate the
    functional and non-functional requirements of the system and data
    quality characteristics. Testers also need to deal with incomplete,
    implied or undocumented requirements. System testing of functional
    requirements starts by using the most appropriate
    specification-based (black-box) techniques for the aspect of the
    system to be tested. For example, by creating a decision table for
    combinations of causes and effects described in business rules.
    Structure based techniques (white-box) may then be used to assess
    the thoroughness of the testing with respect to a structural
    element, such as menu structure or web page navigation.

-   For system testing, use one or more of the following work products
    as test basis for deriving test cases:

<!-- -->

-   System and software requirement specification

-   Use cases

-   Functional specification

-   Risk analysis reports

-   Business processes

-   Models of system behavior

-   Epics / User stories

<!-- -->

-   Typical test objects are:

<!-- -->

-   Systems

-   User and operation manuals

-   System configuration and configuration data

<!-- -->

-   System testing is usually done by an independent test team and not
    by the development team. In general, more independence tends to be
    more effective at finding defects and failures.

-   In system testing, the test environment must be suitable to test the
    system in order to minimize the risk of
    environment-specific failures. The test environment is often a
    scaled down environment of the production environment. For testing
    non-functional attributes such as performance, often a specific test
    environment is needed which is as close as possible to the
    production environment.

-   Acceptance Testing

-   The goal of acceptance testing is to establish confidence in the
    system, parts of the system or in specific non-functional
    characteristics of the system. Finding defects is not the main focus
    of acceptance testing. Acceptance testing may assess the system’s
    readiness for deployment and use, although it is not necessarily the
    final level of testing. For example, a large-scale system
    integration test may come after the acceptance test for a system.

-   For acceptance testing, use one or more of the following work
    products as test basis for deriving test cases:

<!-- -->

-   User requirements

-   System requirements

-   Use cases

-   Business processes

-   Risk analysis reports

-   Epics / User stories

<!-- -->

-   Typical test objects are:

<!-- -->

-   Business processes on fully integrated system

-   Operational and maintenance processes

-   User procedures

-   Forms

-   Reports

-   Configuration data

<!-- -->

-   Acceptance testing is often the responsibility of the customers or
    users of a system; other stakeholders like a product manager or
    expert users may be involved as well.

-   Acceptance testing may occur at various times in the lifecycle, for
    example:

<!-- -->

-   A COTS software product may be acceptance tested when it is
    installed or integrated

-   Acceptance testing of a new functional enhancement may come before
    system integration testing

<!-- -->

-   Typical forms of acceptance testing include the following:

-   User acceptance testing: User acceptance testing typically verifies
    the fitness for use of the system by business users.

-   Operational (acceptance) testing: The acceptance of the system by
    the system administrators includes:

<!-- -->

-   Testing of backup/restore

-   Disaster recovery

-   User management

-   Maintenance tasks

-   Data load and migration tasks

-   Periodic checks of security vulnerabilities

<!-- -->

-   For acceptance testing the test environment should be identical to
    the production environment (both hardware and software) or as close
    to it as possible.

-   Contract acceptance testing: Testing against a contract’s acceptance
    criteria for producing custom-developed software is called contract
    acceptance testing. Acceptance criteria should be defined when the
    parties agree to the contract.

-   Regulation acceptance testing: Testing the system under test against
    any regulations, such as government, legal or safety regulations.
    The system under test must adhere to those specified regulations.

-   -   Alpha and beta (or field) testing: Software development teams of
    market software (COTS) often want to get feedback from potential or
    existing customers before the product is released to the market.

-   A selected group of users is invited to participate in alpha testing
    at the developing organization’s site.

-   Customers or potential customers perform beta testing or field
    testing at their own locations.

2.3 Test Types {#test-types .ListParagraph .Heading2new}
--------------

-   Test types are a group of activities aimed at verifying the software
    system, or part of a system, based on a specific test objective,
    which could be any of the following:

<!-- -->

-   A function to be performed by the software;

-   A non-functional quality characteristic, such as reliability or
    usability;

-   The structure or architecture of the software or system;

-   Change related; confirming that defects have been fixed
    (confirmation testing) and looking for unintended changes
    (regression testing)

<!-- -->

-   A model of the software may be developed and/or used in:

<!-- -->

-   Functional testing like a process flow model, a state transition
    model or a plain language specification;

-   Non-functional testing like a performance model, usability model,
    security threat model;

-   Structural testing like a control flow model or menu
    structure model.

### 2.3.1 Comparison of functional, non-functional and structural test types (K2) 

-   Functional testing

-   Functional testing considers the external behavior of the software.
    The functions are “what” the system does. The functions that a
    system, subsystem or component shall perform are described in its
    work products. Examples of work products are:

<!-- -->

-   Requirement specifications

-   Use cases

-   Functional specifications

-   Epics / user stories

<!-- -->

-   The basis for functional tests are the functions and features
    described in documents. Requirement-based techniques may be used to
    derive test conditions and test cases from the described
    functionality of the software or system.

-   Functional testing may be considered as the external behavior of the
    software (black-box testing). Another type of functional testing,
    interoperability testing, evaluates the capability of the software
    product to interact with one or more specified components
    or systems.

-   Non-functional testing

-   The term non-functional testing describes the tests required to
    measure characteristics of systems and software that can be
    quantified objectively, such as response times for performance
    testing or be judged to conform to requirements like, such a system
    is reliable over a given period of time (i.e. mean time
    between failure). Non-functional tests refer to a quality
    model, e.g. the one defined in ISO 25010. It is the testing of “how”
    the system works. Non-functional testing considers the external
    behavior of the software or component and in most cases uses
    black-box test design techniques to accomplish that. Non-functional
    testing includes, but is not limited to, performance efficiency
    testing, compatibility testing, security testing, usability testing,
    maintainability testing, reliability testing and portability testing

-   Structural testing

-   Use structural testing to analyze the internal structure of
    components, systems and architecture. Structural testing approaches
    can also be applied at system, system integration or acceptance
    testing levels (e.g., to business models or menu structures).

-   Structural techniques are best used after specification-based
    techniques in order to help measure the thoroughness of testing
    through assessment of coverage of a type of structure. Coverage is
    the extent that a structure has been exercised by a test suite, and
    is expressed as a percentage of the items being covered. If coverage
    is not 100%, then more tests may be designed to test the
    missed items.

-   At all test levels, but especially in component testing and
    component integration testing, tools can be used to measure the code
    coverage of elements, such as statements or decisions. Structural
    testing may be based on the architecture of the system, such as a
    calling hierarchy.

### 2.3.2 Occurrence of test types in test levels 

-   At any test level, it is possible to perform any of the test types
    mentioned in section 2.3.1. It is obvious to perform functional or
    non-functional testing during one of the four test levels. Other
    test types to perform are e.g.,

<!-- -->

-   security testing on a component test or system test level

-   usability testing on a system test level

<!-- -->

-   Applying test types as early as possible helps to find defects
    before the last test phase when it might be more common to execute
    those tests.

### 2.3.3 Change related testing

-   To confirm the removal of a defect, the execution of confirmation
    testing is necessary. Confirmation testing checks change(s). e.g. if
    defects found are successfully fixed and have no side effects.
    Regression testing is the repeated testing of a previously tested
    program after modification to discover any defects introduced or
    uncovered because of the change(s). These defects may be either in
    the tested software, or in another related or seemingly unrelated
    software component. After the software or its environment is
    changed, execution of a regression test is necessary to verify if
    the quality of the unchanged software is still the same as before
    the change.

-   Changes in the software relate to two test types:

<!-- -->

-   Confirmation testing: After a defect is detected and fixed, the
    software should be tested again. A confirmation test executes a test
    case, which failed the last time. Confirmation testing is done to
    confirm that the original defect (functional, non-functional
    or structural) has been successfully removed. Tests should be
    repeatable if they are to be used for confirmation testing and to
    assist regression testing.

<!-- -->

-   Debugging (locating and fixing a defect) is a development activity,
    not a testing activity.

<!-- -->

-   Regression testing: Regression testing covers the risk of not
    finding defects in software that was working previously
    (unchanged software). Regression testing may be performed at all
    test levels, and includes functional, non-functional and
    structural testing. Regression test suites are run many times and
    generally evolve slowly, so regression testing is a strong candidate
    for automation.

2.4 Maintenance Testing
-----------------------

-   Once deployed, a software system is often in service for years
    or decades. Often corrections, changes or extensions on features
    take place during the maintenance lifecycle of the system, its
    configuration data, or its environment. The test process between an
    existing or new system may not be all that different, but often the
    amount of testing during maintenance is greater than testing a
    new system. When testing a new system, the focus is on testing the
    whole system as much as possible based on a product risk analysis.
    The focus for maintenance testing is testing the system initiated by
    changes as well as testing the non-changed parts. Depending on the
    changes, maintenance testing generally involves change related
    testing and may be done at any or all test levels and for any or all
    test types.

### 2.4.1 Triggers for maintenance testing

-   The planning of releases in advance is crucial for successful
    maintenance testing. For maintenance testing, make a distinction
    between planned releases and non-planned releases (hot fixes).
    Triggers for maintenance testing on an existing operational system
    are:

-   Modifications on the system: Modifications include planned
    enhancement changes (e.g., release-based), corrective and emergency
    changes, and changes of environment, such as planned operating
    system or database upgrades, planned upgrade of
    Commercial-Off-The-Shelf software. Or patches to correct newly
    exposed or discovered vulnerabilities of the operating system,
    non-planned testing activities.

-   The different types of planned testing activities are:

-   Perfective – add/improve (non-) functional requirements: The system
    is modified e.g. for improving the performance. Some regression
    testing regarding time or resource behavior is needed to test if the
    system functions at it did before the change with a better
    performance

-   Preventive – preventing future problems: By monitoring the system,
    future problems may be detected. Pro-actively making changes to the
    system will help to prevent a failure of the service

-   Adaptive – adjust the software to the environment: This could be
    changes in the software needed to communicate with another or
    updated environment. Testing if the communication still works
    is needed.

-   Corrective – fixing defects: After fixing the defects, confirmation
    testing is needed

-   The different types of non-planned testing activities are:

-   Corrective – emergency fixes of defects: When a service fails in
    production, emergency fixes are needed and also the related testing
    on different test levels under high time pressure.

-   Migration of the system: Maintenance testing for migration (e.g.,
    from one platform to another) should include operational tests of
    the new environment as well as of the changed software. Migration
    testing (conversion testing) is also needed when data from another
    application will be migrated into the system being maintained

-   Retirement of the system: Maintenance testing for the retirement of
    a system may include the testing of data migration or archiving if
    long data-retention periods are required. Testing restore/retrieve
    procedures after archiving for long retention periods.

-   Any of the test types can be applied during maintenance testing just
    like when testing a newly developed system.

### 2.4.2 The role of regression testing and impact analysis in maintenance

-   Besides testing the changed part of the system, maintenance testing
    includes regression testing of the unchanged parts of the system.

-   The scope of maintenance testing relates to:

<!-- -->

-   the risk of the change

-   the size of the existing system

-   the size of the change.

<!-- -->

-   Impact analysis determines if the specified requirements affects the
    existing system. The impact analysis helps to decide how much
    regression testing is needed. The impact analysis may be used to
    determine the regression test suite. If the changes are in a
    high-risk area of the system under test, the regression set for this
    test will increase.

-   Doing an impact analysis can be difficult if:

<!-- -->

-   specifications are out of date or missing

-   test cases are not documented or out of date

-   development documentation is missing or out of date

-   people involved don’t have domain and/or system knowledge.

<!-- -->

-   -   -   

<span id="_Toc367105233" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc367105237"
class="anchor"></span></span>

<span id="_Toc387854603" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc98487658" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc102313645" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc163275058" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc289158581" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc322077022" class="anchor"></span></span></span></span></span></span>Static Techniques – 165 minutes.
=========================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================

Keywords

-   Compiler, complexity, control flow, data flow, dynamic testing,
    entry criteria, formal review, informal review, inspection, metrics,
    moderator, peer review, reviewer, scribe, static code analysis,
    static testing, technical review, walkthrough, Compiler, complexity,
    control flow, data flow, static code analysis

Learning Objectives for Static Testing Techniques

3.1 Static Techniques

LO-3.1.1 (K1) Recognize software work products that can be examined by
different static techniques

LO-3.1.2 (K2) Describe, using examples, the value of using static
techniques

LO-3.1.3 (K2) Explain the difference between static and dynamic
techniques, considering objectives, types of defects to be identified,
and the role of these techniques within the software life cycle

3.2 Review Process

LO-3.2.1 (K2) Summarize the activities of a formal review

LO-3.2.2 (K1) Identify the roles and responsibilities in a formal review

LO-3.2.3 (K2) Explain the differences between different types of
reviews: informal review, walkthrough, technical review and inspection

LO-3.2.4 (K3) Find defects in a specification by a review

LO-3.2.5 (K2) Explain the factors that may contribute to a successful
review

-   

3.1 Static Techniques 
----------------------

-   In comparison to dynamic testing, which requires the execution of
    software, static testing techniques use manual examination (reviews)
    or automated analysis (static analysis) of the code and other
    documentation, without the execution of code.

-   Static techniques, especially reviews, are the most widespread
    activity for early detection of defects. There are various work
    products that should be examined by static techniques to gain
    benefits, which can’t be obtained with dynamic testing.

-   Typically, developers use static analysis tools (checking against
    predefined rules or programming standards) before and during
    component and integration testing or when checking-in code to
    configuration management tools. Also designers use them during
    software modeling. Static analysis tools may produce a large number
    of warning messages (correct and false positives), which need to be
    well managed to allow the most effective use of the tool.

-   Reviews are a way of testing work products including code. They can
    be performed before dynamic test execution. Defects detected during
    reviews early in the life cycle (e.g., defects found
    in requirements) are often much cheaper to remove than those
    detected by running tests on the executable code.

### <span id="_Toc370154662" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc322077024" class="anchor"></span></span>3.1.1 Examinable Work Products for Static Techniques 

-   Static techniques comprise reviews, which are a manual activity, and
    tool-supported static analysis. The main manual activity is to
    examine a work product and provide relevant comments. Any software
    work product can be reviewed, including but not restricted to:

<!-- -->

-   Requirements specifications

-   Design specifications

-   Code

-   Test plans

-   Test specifications

-   Test cases

-   Test scripts

-   User guides

-   Web pages

###  3.1.2 Benefits of Static Techniques 

Benefits of static techniques include

-   Early defect detection and correction (prior to test execution),

-   It identifies defects not easily found by dynamic testing 

-   Development productivity inclusive maintainability of code and
    design improvements,

-   Reduced development timescales,

-   Reduced testing cost and time,

-   Lifetime cost reduction,

-   Fewer defects and

-   Improved communication

### <span id="_Toc322077026" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc89909227" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc98487660" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc102313647" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc163275060" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc289158583" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc322077027" class="anchor"></span></span></span></span></span></span></span>3.1.3 Differences between static and dynamic techniques

-   Reviews, static analysis, and dynamic testing have the same
    objective – identifying defects. They are complementary; the
    different techniques can find different types of defects effectively
    and efficiently. Compared to dynamic testing, static techniques find
    causes of failures (defects) rather than the failures themselves.

-   Typical defects that are easier to find in reviews than in dynamic
    testing include:

<!-- -->

-   Deviations from standards

-   Requirement defects

-   Design defects

-   Insufficient maintainability

-   Incorrect interface specifications

-   Security vulnerabilities

3.2 Review Process 
-------------------

-   The different types of reviews vary from informal to formal.
    Informal is characterized by no written instructions for reviewers.
    Formal is characterized by team participation, documented results of
    the review, and documented procedures for conducting the review. The
    formality of a review process is related to factors such as the
    maturity of the development process, any legal or regulatory
    requirements or the need for an audit trail.

-   The way a review is carried out depends on the agreed objectives of
    the review (e.g. find defects, gain understanding, educate testers
    and new team members, or discussion and decision by consensus).

### 3.2.1 <span id="_Toc89909228" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc98487661" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc102313648" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc163275061" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc289158584" class="anchor"></span></span></span></span></span>Activities of a Formal Review (K2)

A typical formal review has the following main activities:

1.  Planning

-   Defining the review criteria

-   Selecting the personnel

-   Allocating roles

-   Defining the entry and exit criteria for more formal review types
    > (e.g., inspections)

-   Selecting which parts of documents to review

-   Checking entry criteria (for more formal review types)

1.  Kick-off

-   Distributing documents

-   Explaining the objectives, process and documents to the participants

1.  Individual preparation

-   Preparing for the review meeting by reviewing the document(s)

-   Noting potential defects, questions and comments

1.  Examination/evaluation/recording of results (review meeting)

-   Discussing or logging, with documented results or minutes (for more
    > formal review types)

-   Noting defects, making recommendations regarding handling the
    > defects, making decisions about the defects

-   Examining/evaluating and recording issues during any physical
    > meetings or tracking any group electronic communications

1.  Rework

-   Fixing defects found (typically done by the author)

-   Recording updated status of defects (in formal reviews)

1.  Follow-up

-   Checking that defects have been addressed

-   Gathering metrics

-   Checking, if exit criteria are met (for more formal review types)

### 3.2.2 <span id="_Toc89909229" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc98487662" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc102313649" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc163275062" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc289158585" class="anchor"></span></span></span></span></span>Roles and Responsibilities in a formal review

-   A typical formal review will include the roles below:

######  Project manager

-   Decides on the execution of reviews

-   Allocates time in project schedules and

-   Determines if the review objectives have been met

###### Moderator

-   Plans the review

-   Leads the meeting

-   Performs follow-up after the meeting

-   Is often the person upon whom the success of the review rests

-   If necessary, the moderator may mediate between the (reviewers’)
    various points of view.

###### Author: 

-   The writer or person with chief responsibility for the document(s)
    to be reviewed.

###### Reviewers (also called checkers or inspectors)

-   Individuals with a specific technical or business background

-   Identify and describe findings (e.g., defects) in the product under
    > review after the necessary preparation

-   Should be chosen to represent different perspectives and roles in
    > the review process

-   Should take part in any review meeting that requires
    > their expertise.

###### Scribe (or recorder)

-   Document all the issues, problems and open points that were
    identified during the meeting.

### <span id="_Toc98487663" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc102313650" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc163275063" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc289158586" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc322077030" class="anchor"></span></span></span></span></span>3.2.3 Types of Reviews 

-   A single software product or related work product may be the subject
    of more than one review. If more than one type of review is used,
    the order may vary. For example, an informal review may be carried
    out before a technical review, or an inspection may be carried out
    on a requirements specification before a walkthrough with customers.
    The main characteristics, options, and purposes of common review
    types are:

##### Informal Review

-   Main purpose: inexpensive way to get some benefit

-   No formal process

-   May take the form of pair programming, pairwise working or a
    technical lead reviewing designs and code

-   Results may be documented

-   Varies in usefulness depending on the reviewers

##### Walkthrough

-   Main purposes: learning, gaining understanding, finding defects

-   May vary in practice from quite informal to very formal 

-   Meeting led by author

-   May take the form of scenarios, dry runs, peer group participation

-   Open-ended sessions

-   Optional pre-meeting preparation of reviewers

-   Optional preparation of a review report including list of findings

-   Optional scribe (who is not the author)

##### Technical Review

-   Main purposes: discussing, making decisions, evaluating
    alternatives, finding defects, solving technical problems and
    checking conformance to specifications, plans, regulations, and
    standards

-   May vary in practice from quite informal to very formal

-   Documented, defined defect-detection process that includes peers and
    technical experts with optional management participation

-   May be performed as a peer review without management participation

-   Ideally led by trained moderator (not the author)

-   Pre-meeting preparation by reviewers

-   Optional use of checklists

-   Preparation of a review report which includes the list of findings,
    the verdict whether the software product meets its requirements and,
    where appropriate, recommendations related to findings

##### Inspection

-   Main purpose: finding defects and evaluating document quality

-   Led by trained moderator (not the author)

-   Usually peers are reviewer

-   Defined roles

-   Collecting metrics

-   Formal process based on rules and checklists

-   Specified entry and exit criteria for acceptance of the software
    product

-   Pre-meeting preparation

-   Inspection report including list of findings

-   Formal follow-up process (with optional process
    improvement components)

-   Optional reader

Walkthroughs, technical reviews and inspections can be performed within
a peer group, i.e., colleagues at the same organizational level. This
type of review is called a “peer review.

### 3.2.4 Finding defects using reviews

The main objective of reviews is to find *major* defects. This depends
on how the reviewers do their work. Various factors influence this.
Besides using the appropriate review type, in case of a formal review,
along with the adherence to the process and the use the defined roles,
there are further preconditions which influence the work of the
reviewer.

-   Reviewers must be qualified, i.e. they must be able to understand
    the document under review as well as its background.

-   Reviewers need enough time to read the document itself, background
    documents and check possible checklists. Reading means reading in
    order to understand and checking against the background.

-   There must be a nonthreatening atmosphere (i.e. a reviewer must not
    fear to be criticized for “idiotic” comments if something
    was misunderstood)

Defects to be found are

-   “wrong”, i.e. the solution works differently from required or
    expected working,

-   “extra”, i.e. the solution does unnecessary or not required things,
    or

-   “missing”, i.e. some required features do not work or does not work
    in all necessary cases.

The meeting must concentrate on important (major) issues. A reviewer
should sort out any minor points and report them outside of the review
meeting, for example, as written comments.

Looking at software products or related work products from different
perspectives and using checklists can make reviews more effective and
efficient. For example, a checklist based on various perspectives such
as user, maintainer, tester or operations, or a checklist of typical
requirements problems may help to uncover previously undetected issues.

### <span id="_Toc98487664" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc102313651" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc163275064" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc289158587" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc322077031" class="anchor"></span></span></span></span></span>3.2.5 Success Factors for Reviews 

Success factors for reviews include:

-   Clear predefined objectives for each review

-   Involve the right people for the review objectives

-   Testers are valued reviewers. They contribute to the review and also
    learn about the product which enables them to prepare tests earlier 

-   Defects found are welcomed and expressed objectively  

-   All involved persons deal with people issues and psychological
    aspects (e.g., making it a positive experience for all parties
    especially the author) 

-   Conduct the review in an atmosphere of trust; don’t use the outcome
    for evaluating the participants 

-   Apply review techniques that are suitable to achieve the objectives
    and to the type and level of software work products and reviewers 

-   Use Checklists or roles if appropriate to increase effectiveness of
    defect identification

-   Arrange training in review techniques, especially the more formal
    techniques such as inspection 

-   Management supports a good review process (e.g., by incorporating
    adequate time for review activities in project schedules) 

-   There is an emphasis on learning and process improvement

<span id="_Toc322077035" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc329029210" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc329029825" class="anchor"></span></span></span>Test Design Techniques – XXX mins. 
================================================================================================================================================================================

Keywords

Test suite, test case, test condition, test step, test script,
traceability, Black-box test design technique, specification-based test
design technique, experience-based test design technique, test design
technique, white-box test design technique, structure-based test design
technique, Boundary value analysis, decision table testing, equivalence
partitioning, state transition testing, use case testing, Code coverage,
decision coverage, statement coverage, structure-based testing,
white-box testing, exploratory testing, checklist-based testing, fault
attack, error guessing

Learning Objectives Test Design Techniques

4.1 Test Design and Implementation

FL-4.1.1 (K2) Differentiate test suite, test condition, test case and
test step

FL-4.1.2 (K2) Evaluate the quality of test cases in terms of clear
traceability to the requirement and expected results

4.2 Categories of Test Design Techniques

FL-4.2.1 (K2) Explain the characteristics, commonalities, and
differences between specification-based testing, structure-based testing
and experience-based testing

4.3 Specification-based or Black-box Techniques

FL-4.3.1 (K3) Write test cases including coverage measurement from given
requirements (text or model) using equivalence partitioning technique.

FL-4.3.2 (K3) Write test cases including coverage measurement from given
requirements (text or model) using boundary value analysis technique.

FL-4.3.3 (K3) Write test cases including coverage measurement from given
requirements (text or model) using decision table technique.

FL-4.3.4 (K3) Write test cases including coverage measurement from given
requirements (text or model) using state transition diagrams/tables
technique.

FL-4.3.5 (K3) Write test cases from given use cases to cover base path,
alternate paths and exceptions.

FL-4.3.6 (K2) Recognize Pairwise combination testing as a test
technique.

4.4 Structure-based or White-box Techniques (K3)

LO-4.4.1 (K2) Explain the concepts of statement coverage

LO-4.4.2 (K2) Explain the concepts of decision coverage

LO-4.4.3 (K2) Exemplify the value of statement and decision coverage

4.5 Experience-based Testing (K3)

LO-4.5.1 (K2) Explain with example the concept of Error Guessing

LO-4.5.2 (K2) Explain with example the concept Exploratory Testing.

LO-4.5.3 (K2) Explain with example the concept of Checklist-based
testing **\
**

4.1 The Test Development Process 
---------------------------------

The test development process described in this section can be done in
different ways, from very informal with little or no documentation, to
very formal (as it is described below). The level of formality depends
on the context of the testing, including the maturity of testing and
development processes, time constraints, safety or regulatory
requirements, and the people involved.

During test analysis testers implement the detailed test approach and
select the test design techniques to use based on, among other
considerations, the identified risks (see Chapter 5 for more on risk
analysis).

During test design testers develop the test cases and test data.

During test implementation the tester develops, implements, prioritizes
and organizes the test cases to make them ready for execution.

### 4.1.1 test suite, test condition, test case, test step 

-   During test analysis, the tester analyzes the test basis in order to
    determine what to test, i.e., to identify the test conditions. A
    test condition is defined as an item or event that could be verified
    by one or more test cases (e.g., a function, transaction, quality
    characteristic or structural element).

-   During test design the tester specifies test cases and test data. A
    test case consists of a set of input values, execution
    preconditions, expected results and execution postconditions,
    defined to cover a certain test objective(s) or test condition(s).

-   The execution sequence in a test case can be further detailed by
    breaking down a test case into test steps. The test steps specify
    the sequence of actions for the execution of a test. If tests are
    run using a test execution tool, the sequence of actions is
    specified in a test script.

-   Test cases may be ordered into test suites. There is then a smaller
    number of test suites than the number of test cases, making
    overview easier.

### 

### 4.1.2 test suite, test condition, test case, test step 

-   Establishing traceability from test cases to test conditions and
    from test conditions back to the specifications and requirements
    enables both effective impact analysis when requirements change, and
    determining requirements coverage for a set of tests.

-   The tester should produce expected results as part of the
    specification of a test case and include outputs, changes to data
    and states, and any other consequences of the test. If expected
    results have not been defined, then a plausible, but erroneous,
    result may be interpreted as the correct one. Expected results
    should be defined prior to test execution.

-   

4.2 Categories of Test Design Techniques (K2) 
----------------------------------------------

-   <span id="_Toc322077041" class="anchor"></span>The purpose of a test
    design technique is to identify test conditions, test cases, and
    test data.

### 4.2.1 Characteristics, commonalities, and differences between specification-based testing, structure-based testing and experience-based testing

-   It is a classic distinction to denote test techniques as black-box
    or white-box. Black-box test design techniques (also called
    specification-based techniques) are a way to derive and select test
    conditions, test cases, or test data based on an analysis of the
    test basis documentation. This includes both functional and
    non-functional testing. Black-box test testing, by definition, does
    not use any information about the internal structure of the
    test object. White-box test design techniques (also called
    structural or structure-based techniques) are based on an analysis
    of the structure of the component or system. Black-box and white-box
    testing may also be combined with experience-based techniques to
    leverage the experience of developers, testers and users to
    determine what should be tested. Some techniques fall clearly into a
    single category; others have elements of more than one category.

-   White-box test design techniques analyze the structure of the
    test object. In practice this is mostly the code. Black-box and
    white-box testing may also be combined with
    experience-based techniques. These leverage the experience of
    developers, testers and users to determine what should be tested.

-   Common characteristics of black-box / specification-based test
    design techniques include:

-   Common characteristics of specification-based test design techniques
    include:

<!-- -->

-   Use formal or informal models to specify

    -   the problem to be solved,

    -   the software design or

    -   its components

-   Test cases can be derived systematically from these models

<!-- -->

-   Common characteristics of white box / structure-based test design
    techniques include:

<!-- -->

-   They use information about how the software is constructed to derive
    the test cases (e.g., information about the detailed design
    and code)

<!-- -->

-   The extent of code coverage can be measured for existing test cases,
    and further test cases can be derived systematically to increase
    coverage

Common characteristics of experience-based test design techniques
include:

-   They use the knowledge and experience of people to derive the test
    cases

-   Main sources of information:

-   Knowledge of testers, developers, users and other stakeholders about
    the software, its usage and its environment.

-   Knowledge about likely defects and their distribution.

The international standard ISO/IEC/IEEE 29119-4 contains descriptions of
test design techniques.

4.3 Specification-based or Black-box Techniques
-----------------------------------------------

### 4.3.1 Equivalence Partitioning 

-   Equivalence partitioning divides data into groups that are expected
    to lead to similar behavior, so they are likely to be processed in
    the same way. There are equivalence partitions (or
    equivalence classes) for both valid and invalid values.

<!-- -->

-   Valid values are values that should be accepted. An equivalence
    class containing valid values is also called “valid
    equivalence class”.

-   Invalid values are values that should be rejected. An equivalence
    class containing invalid values is also called “invalid
    equivalence class”.

-   Partitions can be identified for any data, e.g., inputs, outputs,
    internal values, time-related values (e.g., before or after
    an event) and for interface parameters (e.g., integrated components
    being tested during integration testing).

-   The equivalence classes for a data element taken together must cover
    all possible data values for this data element.

-   When invalid equivalence classes are used in test cases, they should
    be used individually, i.e. not be combined with other invalid
    equivalence classes.

<!-- -->

-   Test cases should cover all valid and invalid partitions. Coverage
    is measured as the percentage of defined equivalence classes used in
    designing test cases. Equivalence partitioning is applicable at all
    levels of testing.

### 4.3.2 Boundary Value Analysis 

-   Behavior at the edge of each equivalence partition is more likely to
    be incorrect than behavior within the partition, so boundaries are
    an area where testing is likely to catch defects. The maximum and
    minimum values of a partition are its boundary values. A boundary
    value for a valid partition is a *valid* boundary value; the
    boundary of an invalid partition is an *invalid* boundary value.
    Tests should cover both valid and invalid boundary values.

-   Boundary value analysis can be applied at all test levels. It is
    relatively easy to apply and its defect finding capability is high.
    Detailed specifications help in determining the
    interesting boundaries.

-   This technique is an extension of equivalence partitioning. It can
    also be used to extend other black-box test design techniques.
    However, it can only be used for numerical data. It is useful for
    equivalence classes for user input as well as, for example, on time
    ranges (e.g., time out, transactional speed requirements) or table
    ranges (e.g., table size is 256\*256).

-   Coverage is measured as the percentage of defined boundary values
    used in designing test cases.

### 4.3.3 Decision Table Testing 

-   Combinatorial test design techniques are useful for testing system
    requirements and system designs that contain logical conditions. Two
    main approaches are decision table testing and pair-wise testing
    (Section 4.3.6).

-   Decision tables are a good way to record complex business rules that
    a system must implement. When creating decision tables, the tester
    identifies conditions and actions of the system. The input
    conditions and actions are usually listed in such a way that they
    must be true or false (Boolean). Otherwise they may be discrete
    values (e.g., red, green, yellow). The columns of the decision table
    contain the triggering conditions, usually a combination of true and
    false for all input conditions, and the resulting actions. Each
    column corresponds to a business rule that defines a unique
    combination of conditions and which result in the execution of the
    actions associated with that rule.

-   In the worst case, the decision table may have one column for every
    possible combination of conditions. The number of columns can be
    reduced by deleting impossible combinations and combinations where
    one or more parameters can be ignored.

-   <span id="_Toc322077046" class="anchor"></span>The common coverage
    standard with decision table testing is to have at least one test
    per column in the table. This typically involves covering all
    combinations of triggering conditions.

-   The strength of decision table testing is that it creates
    combinations of conditions that otherwise might not have been
    exercised during testing. It may be applied to all situations when
    the action of the software depends on several logical decisions,
    independent of test level.

### 4.3.4 State Transition Testing

-   A system may exhibit a different response depending on current
    conditions or previous history (its state). In this case, a state
    transition diagram may show that aspect of the system. It allows
    viewing the software in terms of its states, transitions between
    states, the inputs or events that trigger state
    changes (transitions) and the actions resulting from
    those transitions.

-   The states of the test object are separate, identifiable and finite
    in number. A state transition table shows the relationship between
    the states and inputs, and can highlight possible transitions that
    are invalid.

-   Tests can be designed to cover a typical sequence of states, to
    cover every state, to exercise every transition, to exercise
    specific sequences of transitions or to test invalid transitions.

-   State transition testing is much used within the embedded software
    industry and technical automation. However, the technique is also
    suitable for modeling a business object having specific states or
    testing screen-dialogue flows (e.g., for Internet applications or
    business scenarios).

-   Coverage is usually measured as the percentage of identified states
    or state transitions used in designing test cases.

### 4.3.5 Use Case Testing 

-   Tests can be derived from use cases. A use case describes
    interactions between actors (users or systems), which produce a
    result with value to a system user or the customer. Use cases may be
    described at the abstract level (business use case, technology-free,
    business process level) or at the system level (system use case on
    the system functionality level). Each use case has preconditions,
    which need to be met for the use case to work successfully. Each use
    case terminates with post-conditions, which are the observable
    results, and a final state of the system after the use case has
    been completed. A use case usually has a normal (i.e., most likely)
    flow and alternative flows and exceptions.

-   Test cases combine flows through the use cases. They start with the
    first flow and then use different flows. Use case test coverage is
    measured as the percentage of defined use case flows used in
    designing test cases. Use case testing does not require specific
    data values. The only requirement is that input values trigger the
    intended flows.

-   Use cases describe the “process flows” through a system based on its
    actual likely use. The test cases derived from use cases are most
    useful in finding defects in the process flows during use of
    the system. Use cases are very useful for designing system and
    acceptance tests with customer/user participation. They also help
    finding integration defects caused by the interaction and
    interference of different components. Individual component testing
    would not see these. Designing test cases from use cases may be
    combined with other specification-based test techniques.

-   Coverage is usually measured as the percentage of identified use
    case flows used in designing test cases

### 4.3.6 Pair-Wise testing

-   Another combinatorial testing technique is using
    pairwise combinations. Test cases contain all combinations of each
    pair of inputs, but not all combinations of inputs. The number of
    test cases may be much smaller than with decision tables.

-   For example, if there are three parameters, all combinations of
    parameters 1 and 2, 1 and 3, and 2 and 3 are included, but not all
    combinations between all three parameters. The technique is used for
    cases where programs might implement wrong behavior for pairs of
    values but where possible value interaction is unknown. The
    technique is not strong enough if there must be found wrong
    interactions between more than two parameters.

-   This technique usually requires using tools. The technique is very
    useful for platform testing and testing parameter settings.

4.4 Structure-based or White-box Techniques
-------------------------------------------

<span id="_Toc322077049" class="anchor"></span>Structure-based or
white-box testing is based on an identified structure of the software or
the system, as seen in the following examples:

-   Component level: the structure of a software component, i.e.,
    statements, decisions, branches or even distinct paths

-   Integration level: the structure may be a call tree (a diagram in
    which modules call other modules) or a description of the data flows

-   System level: the structure may be a menu structure, business
    process or web page structure

    This section discusses two code-related structural test design
    techniques for code coverage, based on statements, branches
    and decisions. Instead of code, a control flow diagram may be used
    to visualize the alternatives for each decision. In that case,
    covering the branches in the diagram covers decisions in the code.
    Code coverage intends to execute every executable part of the code
    during testing. In principle, the quality of code not executed
    during dynamic testing is unknown.

    In practice, white-box testing is mostly used in lower test levels.

    Branch and decision coverage denote the same technique. Coverage
    measures the percentage of decision outcomes (e.g., the True and
    False options of an IF statement) that have been exercised by
    a test.

### 4.4.1 Statement Testing and Coverage 

-   Statement coverage aims to execute the executable statements in
    the code. In component testing, statement coverage for a test suite
    measures the percentage of executable statements that have
    been exercised. The statement testing technique derives test cases
    to execute specific statements, normally to increase
    statement coverage.

### 4.4.2 Decision Testing and Coverage 

-   Decision coverage aims to execute the different decision outcomes in
    the code. Branch coverage tries to execute control flow branches in
    a control-flow diagram. Branches originate from decision points in
    the code and show the transfer of control to different locations in
    the code.

-   Decision testing is a form of control flow testing as it follows a
    specific flow of control through the decision points. Decision
    coverage is stronger than statement coverage; 100% decision coverage
    guarantees 100% statement coverage, but not vice versa. Decision
    coverage follows up even execution of implied branches /
    control flows. Statement coverage is only concerned with explicitly
    given branches / control flows.

### 4.4.3 The value of statement and decision coverage

Both statement and branch/decision techniques will execute all
executable statements in the code. This makes sure there is no untested
code in the system. Branch/decision coverage additionally executes
control flow branches that lead to no executable statements. In case the
programmer forgot to code something in an otherwise empty branch, this
may be found.

4.5 Experience-based Testing 
-----------------------------

Experience-based testing derives test cases from the tester’s skill and intuition and their experience with similar applications and technologies. When used to augment systematic techniques, these techniques can be useful in identifying special tests not easily captured by other techniques, especially when applied after more formal approaches However, this technique may yield widely varying degrees of coverage and effectiveness, depending on the testers’ approach and experience.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 4.5.1 Error Guessing

A commonly used experience-based technique is error guessing. Generally testers anticipate defects based on experience with 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

-   how the application has worked in the past, 
    --------------------------------------------

-   experience with working with the developers and knowing the sorts of mistakes they make and 
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

-   experience about problems in other applications. 
    -------------------------------------------------

### 4.5.2 Exploratory Testing

Another approach to do experience-based testing is exploratory testing. Exploratory testing is concurrent test design, test execution, test logging, evaluation and learning. Test cases are immediately executed after designing them. The tester then gets new test ideas from observing the results. This technique is based on a test charter containing test objectives, and carried out within predefined time-boxes, in order to control the time used. It is an approach that is most useful where there are few or inadequate specifications and severe time pressure, or in order to augment or complement other, more formal testing. It can serve as a check on the test process, to help ensure that the most serious defects are found.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In order to be manageable, experience based testing requires thorough documenting and reporting. Any applicable coverage criteria for other techniques may be followed up.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 4.5.3 Checklist based-testing

A structured approach is to use a checklist to enumerate a list of possible situations to test and to design tests that cover them. Such checklists can be built based on experience, available defect and failure data, and from common knowledge about what is important for the software user and why software fails. Other similar systems may also provide checklists for enhancement.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

-   The choice of test techniques depends on factors like the type of
    system, the test level, regulatory standards, level and types of
    risk and other factors. When creating test cases, testers generally
    use a combination of test techniques to ensure adequate coverage of
    the test object. Black-box test design techniques should always
    be chosen. White-box techniques are most applicable for
    lower-level testing. Experience-based techniques can be used to
    augment the test. Equivalence partitioning is used to cover data
    variation and possible invalid data. Boundary value analysis is used
    for numerical input data. Decision table testing is used where logic
    is involved. Pairwise combination testing is used where decision
    tables get too complicated or where too many inputs exist with
    unknown interactions. State-transition testing is useful where
    states are important or where a system depends on input or
    execution history. No test technique precludes application of any
    other test technique.

-   

Test Management – XXX mins. 
============================

Keywords

Tester, test leader, test manager, test approach, test strategy, defect
density, failure rate, test control, test monitoring, test summary
report, configuration management, version control, risk, product risk,
project risk, risk-based testing, incident logging, incident management,
incident report

Learning Objectives for Test Management

5.1 Test Organization (K2)

FL-5.1.1 (K2) Explain the benefits and drawbacks of independent testing
for various project situations and maintenance and support organizations

FL-5.1.2 (K1) Identify the tasks of a test manager and tester

5.2 Test Planning and Estimation (K3)

FL-5.2.1 (K2) Summarize the purpose and content of a test plan

FL-5.2.2 (K2) Differentiate between different test approaches

FL-5.2.3 (K2) Give examples of adequate entry and exit criteria for
specific test levels and test types

FL-5.2.4 (K2) Explain how to schedule test execution for a given set of
test cases, considering prioritization, and technical and logical
dependencies.

FL-5.2.3 (K1) Identify the factors that influence the effort related to
testing

FL-5.2.4 (K2) Explain the difference between the two estimation
approaches: the metrics-based approach and the expert-based approach

FL-5.2.5 (K2) Give examples of adequate entry and exit criteria for
specific test levels and test types

5.3 Test Progress Monitoring and Control (K2)

FL-5.3.1 (K1) Recall metrics used for testing

FL-5.3.2 (K2) Summarize the purpose, content, and audience of a test
report

5.4 Configuration Management (K2)

FL-5.4.1 (K2) Summarize how configuration management supports testing

5.5 Risks and Testing (K2)

FL-5.5.1 (K1) Define risk using likelihood and impact

FL-5.5.2 (K2) Distinguish between the project and product risks

FL-5.5.3 (K2) Describe, using examples, how product risk analysis may
influence thoroughness and scope of testing

5.6 Incident Management (K3)

FL-5.6.1 (K3) Write an incident report covering events that require
investigation during testing.

5.1 Test Organization 
----------------------

### 5.1.1 Test Organization and Independence 

-   A certain degree of independence (avoiding the author bias) often
    makes the tester more effective at finding defects and failures.
    Independence is not, however, a replacement for familiarity, and
    developers can efficiently find many defects in their own code. The
    effectiveness of finding defects by testing and reviews can be
    improved by using independent testers. Several levels of
    independence can be defined from low level of independence to high
    level of independence as follows:

<!-- -->

-   Tests designed by the person(s) who wrote the software under test
    (low level of independence)

-   Tests designed by another person(s) (e.g., from the
    development team)

-   Tests designed by a person(s) from a different organizational group
    (e.g., an independent test team) or test specialists (e.g.,
    usability or performance test specialists)

-   Tests designed by a person(s) from a different organization or
    company (i.e., outsourcing or certification by an external body)

<!-- -->

-   For large, complex or safety critical projects, it is usually best
    to have multiple levels of testing, with some of the levels tested
    by independent testers. Development staff may participate in
    testing, especially at the lower levels, but their lack of
    objectivity often limits their effectiveness. The independent
    testers may have the authority to require and define test processes
    and rules, but testers should take on such process-related roles
    only in the presence of a clear management mandate to do so.

-   The benefits of test independence include:

<!-- -->

-   Independent testers see other and different defects, and are
    unbiased

-   An independent tester can verify assumptions people made during
    specification and implementation of the system

<!-- -->

-   Drawbacks of test independence include:

<!-- -->

-   Isolation from the development team (if treated as
    totally independent)

-   Developers may lose a sense of responsibility for quality

-   Independent testers may be seen as a bottleneck or blamed for delays
    in release

<!-- -->

-   Testing tasks may be done by people in a specific testing role, or
    may be done by someone in another role, such as a project manager,
    quality manager, developer, business and domain expert,
    infrastructure or IT operations.

### 5.1.2 Tasks of a Test Manager and Tester 

-   In this syllabus two test positions are covered, test manager
    and tester. The activities and tasks performed by people in these
    two roles depend on the project and product context, the people in
    the roles, and the organization.

-   The role of the test leader may be performed by a project manager, a
    development manager, a quality assurance manager or the manager of a
    test group. In larger projects two positions may exist: test leader
    and test manager.

-   Typical test manager tasks may include:

<!-- -->

-   Coordinate the test strategy and plan with project managers and
    others

-   Write or review a test strategy and test policy for the organization

-   Contribute the testing perspective to other project activities, such
    as integration planning

-   Plan the tests – considering the context and understanding the test
    objectives and risks – including selecting test approaches,
    estimating the time, effort and cost of testing, acquiring
    resources, defining test levels, cycles, and planning incident
    management

-   Initiate the analysis, design, implementation and execution of
    tests, monitor the test results and check the exit criteria

-   Adapt planning based on test results and progress (sometimes
    documented in status reports) and take any action necessary to
    compensate for problems

-   Set up adequate configuration management of testware for
    traceability

-   Introduce suitable metrics for measuring test progress and
    evaluating the quality of the testing and the product

-   Decide what should be automated, to what degree, and how

-   Select tools to support testing and organize any training in tool
    use for testers

-   Decide about the implementation of the test environment

-   Write test summary reports based on the information gathered during
    testing

<!-- -->

-   Typical tester’s tasks may include:

<!-- -->

-   Review and contribute to test plans

-   Analyze, review and assess user requirements, specifications and
    models for testability

-   Create test specifications

-   Set up the test environment (often coordinating with system
    administration and network management)

-   Prepare and acquire test data

-   Designing and implementing test cases at various test levels

-   Execute tests, evaluate the results and document the deviations from
    expected results

-   Use test administration or management tools and test monitoring
    tools as required

-   Automate tests (may be supported by a developer or a test
    automation expert)

-   Measure performance of components and systems (if applicable)

-   Review tests developed by others

<!-- -->

-   People who work on test analysis, test design, specific test types
    or test automation may be specialists in these roles. Depending on
    the test level and the risks related to the product and the project,
    different people may take over the role of tester, keeping some
    degree of independence. Typically testers at the component and
    integration level would be developers, testers at the acceptance
    test level would be business experts and users, and testers for
    operational acceptance testing would be operators.

5.2 Test Planning and Estimation 
---------------------------------

###  5.2.1 Purpose and content of a test plan 

-   The test plan documents test planning activities for development and
    maintenance projects. Planning is influenced by the test policy and
    test strategy of the organization, the scope of testing, objectives,
    risks, constraints, criticality, testability and the availability
    of resources. As the project and test planning progress, more
    information becomes available and more detail can be included in the
    test plan.

-   Test planning is a continuous activity and is performed in all life
    cycle processes and activities. Feedback from test activities is
    used to recognize changing risks so that planning can be adjusted.
    Planning may be documented in a master test plan and in separate
    test plans for test levels such as system testing and
    acceptance testing.

-   Test planning activities for an entire system or part of a system
    may include:

<!-- -->

-   Determining the scope and risks and identifying the objectives of
    testing

-   Defining the overall approach of testing, including the definition
    of the test levels and entry and exit criteria

-   Integrating and coordinating the testing activities into the
    software life cycle activities (acquisition, supply, development,
    operation and maintenance)

-   Making decisions about what to test, what roles will perform the
    test activities, how the test activities should be done, and how the
    test results will be evaluated

-   Scheduling test analysis and design activities

-   Scheduling test implementation, execution and evaluation

-   Assigning resources for the different activities defined

-   Defining the amount, level of detail, structure and templates for
    the test documentation o

-   Selecting metrics for monitoring and controlling test preparation
    and execution, defect resolution and risk issues

-   Determining the level of detail for test documentation in order to
    provide enough information to support reproducible test preparation
    and execution

### 5.2.2 Test Approaches 

The test approach is the implementation of the test strategy for a
specific project. The test approach is defined and refined in the test
plans and test designs. It typically includes the decisions made based
on the (test) project’s goal and risk assessment. It is the starting
point for planning the test process, for selecting the test design
techniques and test types to be applied, and for defining the entry and
exit criteria.

The selected approach depends on the context and may consider risks,
hazards and safety, available resources and skills, the technology, the
nature of the system (e.g., custom built vs. COTS), test objectives, and
regulations.

Typical approaches include:

-   Analytical approaches, such as risk-based testing where testing is
    directed to areas of greatest risk

<!-- -->

-   Model-based approaches, such as stochastic testing using statistical
    information about failure rates (such as reliability growth models)
    or usage (such as operational profiles)

-   Methodical approaches, such as failure-based (including error
    guessing and fault attacks), experience-based, checklist-based, and
    quality characteristic-based

-   Process- or standard-compliant approaches, such as those specified
    by industry-specific standards or the various agile methodologies

-   Dynamic and heuristic approaches, such as exploratory testing where
    testing is more reactive to events than pre-planned, and where
    execution and evaluation are concurrent tasks

-   Consultative approaches, such as those in which test coverage is
    driven primarily by the advice and guidance of technology and/or
    business domain experts outside the test team

-   Regression-averse approaches, such as those that include reuse of
    existing test material, extensive automation of functional
    regression tests, and standard test suites

Different approaches may be combined, for example, a risk-based, dynamic
approach.

### 5.2.3 Adequate Entry and Exit Criteria for specific test levels and types

**Entry Criteria **

Entry criteria define when to start testing such as at the beginning of
a test level or when a set of tests is ready for execution. Typically
entry criteria may cover the following:

-   Test environment availability and readiness

-   Test tool readiness in the test environment

-   Testable code availability

-   Test data availability

    **Exit Criteria **

    Exit criteria define when to stop testing such as at the end of a
    test level or when a set of tests has achieved specific goal.
    Typically exit criteria may cover the following:

<!-- -->

-   Thoroughness measures, such as coverage of code, functionality or
    risk

-   Estimates of defect density or reliability measures o Cost

-   Residual risks, such as defects not fixed or lack of test coverage
    in certain areas

-   Schedules such as those based on time to market

### 5.2.4 Test Execution Schedule

-   XXX

### 5.2.5 Factors influencing Testing Effort

The testing effort may depend on a number of factors, including:

-   Characteristics of the product: the quality of the specification and
    other information used for test models (i.e., the test basis), the
    size of the product, the complexity of the problem domain, the
    requirements for reliability and security, and the requirements for
    documentation

-   Characteristics of the development process: the stability of the
    organization, tools used, test process, skills of the people
    involved, and time pressure

-   The outcome of testing: the number of defects and the amount of
    rework required

### 5.2.6 Test Estimation approaches

Two approaches for the estimation of test effort are:

-   The metrics-based approach: estimating the testing effort based on
    metrics of former or similar projects or based on typical values

-   The expert-based approach: estimating the tasks based on estimates
    made by the owner of the tasks or by experts

-   

5.3 Test Progress Monitoring and Control 
-----------------------------------------

### 5.3.1 Metrics used in testing 

The purpose of test monitoring and reporting is to provide feedback and
visibility about test activities. Information to be monitored may be
collected manually or automatically and may be used to measure exit
criteria, such as coverage.

Metrics should be collected during and at the end of a test level in
order to assess:

-   The adequacy of the test objectives for that test level

-   The adequacy of the test approaches taken

-   The effectiveness of the testing with respect to the objectives

-   Assess progress against the planned schedule and budget

<!-- -->

-   Common test metrics include:

<!-- -->

-   Percentage of work done in test case preparation (or percentage of
    planned test cases prepared)

-   Percentage of work done in test environment preparation

-   Test case execution (e.g., number of test cases run/not run, and
    test cases passed/failed)

-   Defect information (e.g., defect density, defects found and fixed,
    failure rate, and re-test results)

-   Test coverage of requirements, risks or code

-   Subjective confidence of testers in the product

-   Dates of test milestones

-   Testing costs, including the cost compared to the benefit of finding
    the next defect or to run the next test

### 5.3.2 Purpose, content, and stakeholders of test report and control 

Test reporting is concerned with summarizing information about the
testing activities, including:

-   What happened during a period of testing, such as dates when exit
    criteria were met

-   Analyzed information and metrics to support recommendations and
    decisions about future actions, such as an assessment of defects
    remaining, the economic benefit of continued testing, outstanding
    risks, and the level of confidence in the tested software

<!-- -->

-   Test control describes any guiding or corrective actions taken as a
    result of monitoring, gathering metrics and reporting. Actions may
    cover any test activity and may affect any other software life cycle
    activity or task.

-   Examples of test control actions include:

<!-- -->

-   Making decisions based on information from test monitoring

-   Re-prioritizing tests when an identified risk occurs (e.g., software
    delivered late)

-   Changing the test schedule due to availability or unavailability of
    a test environment

-   Setting an entry criterion requiring fixes to have been re-tested
    (confirmation tested) by a developer before accepting them into a
    build

5.4 Configuration Management 
-----------------------------

-   The purpose of configuration management is to establish and maintain
    the integrity of the products (components, data and documentation)
    of the software or system through the project and product
    life cycle.

### 5.4.1 Configuration management in support of testing

-   For testing, configuration management may involve ensuring the
    following:

<!-- -->

-   All items of testware are identified, version controlled, tracked
    for changes, related to each other and related to development items
    (test objects) so that traceability can be maintained throughout the
    test process

-   All identified documents and software items are referenced
    unambiguously in test documentation

<!-- -->

-   For testers, configuration management helps identify (and
    to reproduce) the current tested item, test documents, the tests and
    the test harness(es). During test planning, configuration management
    procedures and infrastructure (tools) should be chosen, documented
    and implemented.

5.5 Risk and Testing 
---------------------

### 5.5.1 Definition of Risk 

-   Risk can be defined as the chance of an event, hazard, threat or
    situation, which results in undesirable consequences or a
    potential problem. The level of risk will be determined by the
    likelihood of an adverse event happening and the impact (the harm
    resulting from that event).

### 5.5.2 Project and Product Risks 

##### Project Risks 

Project risks are the risks that surround the project’s capability to
deliver its objectives, such as:

-   Organizational factors:

-   Skill, training and staff shortages

-   Personnel issues

-   Political issues, such as:

-   Problems with testers communicating their needs and test results

-   Failure by the team to follow up on information found in testing and
    reviews

-   (e.g., not improving development and testing practices)

-   Improper attitude toward or expectations of testing (e.g., not
    appreciating the value of finding defects during testing)

-   Technical issues:

-   Problems in defining the right requirements

-   The extent to which requirements cannot be met given existing
    constraints

-   Test environment not ready on time

-   Late data conversion, migration planning and development and testing
    data conversion/migration tools

-   Low quality of the design, code, configuration data, test data and
    tests

-   Supplier issues:

-   Failure of a third party

-   Contractual issues

#####  Product Risks 

Potential failure areas (adverse future events or hazards) in the
software or system are known as product risks. As they are a risk to the
quality of the product, they are also called quality risks. Examples of
product risks include:

-   Failure-prone software delivered

-   The potential that the software/hardware could cause harm to an
    individual or company

-   Poor software characteristics (e.g., functionality, reliability,
    usability and performance)

-   Poor data integrity and quality (e.g., data migration issues, data
    conversion problems, data transport problems, violation of
    data standards)

-   Software that does not perform its intended functions

### 5.5.3 Considering thoroughness and scope of testing based on risk analysis

-   Risk is used to focus the effort required during testing. It is used
    to decide where and when to start testing and the areas that need
    more testing effort. Testing is used to reduce the risk of an
    adverse effect occurring, or to reduce the impact of an
    adverse effect.

-   Identifying project and product risks contributes to the success of
    a project. Testing is used as a risk-control activity to provide
    feedback about the identified risks as well as any residual risk by
    measuring the effectiveness of critical defect removal and of
    contingency plans.

-   A risk-based approach to testing provides proactive opportunities to
    reduce the levels of product risk, starting in the initial stages of
    a project. It involves identification of product risks and their use
    in guiding test planning and control, specification, preparation and
    execution of tests. In a risk-based approach the risks identified
    may be used to:

<!-- -->

-   Determine the test techniques to be employed

-   Determine the extent of testing to be carried out

-   Prioritize testing in an attempt to find the critical defects as
    early as possible

-   Determine whether any non-testing activities could be employed to
    reduce risk (e.g., providing training to inexperienced designers)

<!-- -->

-   Risk-based testing draws on the collective knowledge and insight of
    the project stakeholders to determine the risks and the levels of
    testing required to address those risks. To ensure that the chance
    of a product failure is minimized, risk management activities
    provide a disciplined approach to:

<!-- -->

-   Assess (and reassess on a regular basis) what can go wrong (risks)

-   Determine what risks are important to deal with

-   Implement actions to deal with those risks

<!-- -->

-   In addition, testing may support the identification of new risks,
    may help to determine what risks should be reduced, and may lower
    uncertainty about risks.

5.6 Incident Management 
------------------------

Since one of the objectives of testing is to find defects, the
discrepancies between actual and expected outcomes need to be logged as
incidents. An incident must be investigated and may turn out to be a
defect. Appropriate actions to dispose incidents and defects should be
defined. Incidents and defects should be tracked from discovery and
classification to correction and confirmation of the solution. In order
to manage all incidents to completion, an organization should establish
an incident management process and rules for classification.

### 5.6.1 Structure ad content of incident reports

<span id="_Toc322077074" class="anchor"></span>Incidents may be reported
during development, review, testing or use of a software product. They
may be reported for issues in code or working systems, or in any type of
documentation including requirements, development documents, test
documents, user manual, or installation guides.

-   Incident reports have the following objectives:

<!-- -->

-   Provide developers and other parties with feedback about the problem
    to enable identification, isolation and correction as necessary

-   Provide test leaders a means of tracking the quality of the system
    under test and the progress of the testing

-   Provide ideas for test process improvement

<!-- -->

-   Details of the incident report may include:

<!-- -->

-   Date of issue, issuing organization, and author

-   Expected and actual results

-   Identification of the test item (configuration item) and environment

-   Software or system life cycle process in which the incident was
    observed

-   Description of the incident to enable reproduction and resolution,
    including logs, database dumps or screenshots

-   Scope or degree of impact on stakeholder(s) interests

-   Severity of the impact on the system

-   Urgency/priority to fix

-   Status of the incident (e.g., open, deferred, duplicate, waiting to
    be fixed, fixed awaiting re-test, closed)

-   Conclusions, recommendations and approvals

-   Global issues, such as other areas that may be affected by a change
    resulting from the incident

-   Change history, such as the sequence of actions taken by project
    team members with respect to the incident to isolate, repair, and
    confirm it as fixed

-   References, including the identity of the test case specification
    that revealed the problem

Tool Support for Testing - 40 Min. 
===================================

Keywords

Application lifecycle management tool, configuration management tool,
coverage tool, debugging tool, dynamic analysis tool, defect management
tool, load testing tool, modeling tool, monitoring tool, performance
testing tool, probe effect, requirements management tool, review tool,
security tool, static analysis tool, stress testing tool, test
comparator, test data preparation tool, test design tool, test harness,
test execution tool, test management tool, unit test framework tool,
data-driven testing, keyword-driven testing, scripting language

Learning Objectives for Test Tools

6.1 Test tool Classification

FL-6.1.1 (K2) Classify test tools according to their purpose and the
test activities that they support.

FL-6.1.2 (K1) Identify benefits and risks of test automation ~~automated
test tools and execution~~

FL-6.1.3 (K1) Remember special considerations for test execution tools,
static analysis, and test management tools

6.2 Effective use of Tools

FL-6.2.1 (K1) Identify the main principles for selecting a tool

FL-6.2.2 (K1) Identify the objectives for a pilot project for tool
evaluation

FL-6.2.3 (K1) Identify the success factors for evaluation,
implementation, deployment and on-going

support of test tools in an organization

<span id="_Toc329029205" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc329029820" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc338266023" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc322077076" class="anchor"></span></span></span></span>6.1 Test Tools
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Test tools can be used for one or more activities that support testing.
These include:

-   Tools that are directly used in testing such as test execution
    tools, test data generation tools and result comparison tools

-   Tools that help in managing the testing process such as those used
    to manage tests, test results, data, requirements, incidents,
    defects, etc., and for reporting and monitoring test execution

-   Tools that are used in reconnaissance, or, in simple terms:
    exploration (e.g., tools that monitor file activity for
    an application)

-   Any tool that aids in testing (a spreadsheet is also a test tool in
    this meaning)

    Tool support for testing can have one or more of the following
    purposes depending on the context:

<!-- -->

-   Improve the efficiency of test activities by automating repetitive
    tasks or supporting manual test activities like test planning, test
    design, test reporting and monitoring

-   Automate activities that require significant resources when done
    manually (e.g., static testing)

-   Automate activities that cannot be executed manually (e.g., large
    scale performance testing of client-server applications)

-   Increase reliability of testing (e.g., by automating large data
    comparisons or simulating behavior)

### 6.1.1 Test Tool Classifications

-   There are a number of tools that support different aspects
    of testing. Tools can be classified based on several criteria such
    as purpose, commercial / free / open-source / shareware, technology
    used and so forth. Tools are classified in this syllabus according
    to the testing activities that they support.

-   Some tools clearly support one activity; others may support more
    than one activity, but are classified under the activity with which
    they are most closely associated. Tools from a single provider,
    especially those that have been designed to work together, may be
    bundled into one package.

-   Some types of test tools can be intrusive, which means that they can
    affect the actual outcome of the test. For example, the actual
    timing may be different due to the extra instructions that are
    executed by the tool, or you may get a different measure of
    code coverage. The consequence of intrusive tools is called the
    probe effect.

-   Some tools offer support more appropriate for developers (e.g.,
    tools that are used during unit and integration testing). Such tools
    are marked with “(D)” in the sections below.

### Tool Support for Management of Testing and Tests

Management tools apply to all test activities over the entire software
life cycle. Examples of these tools include:

-   Test Management and Application Lifecycle Management Tools

-   Requirements Management Tools

-   Incident Management Tools/Defect Tracking Tools

-   Configuration Management Tools

**Tool Support for Static Testing**

Static testing tools provide a cost effective way of finding more
defects at an earlier stage in the development process. Examples of
these tools include:

-   Review Tools

-   Static Analysis Tools (D)

-   Modeling Tools (D)

**Tool Support for Test Specification**

Test specification tools aid in the creation of robust test
specifications, including test case and test procedure specifications.
Examples of these tools include:

-   Test Design Tools

-   Test Data Preparation Tools

**Tool Support for Test Execution and Logging**

Many tools exist to support and enhance test execution and logging
activities. Examples of these tools include:

-   Test Execution Tools

-   Test Harness/Unit Test Framework Tools (D)

-   Test Comparators

-   Coverage Measurement Tools (D)

-   Security Testing Tools

**Tool Support for Performance and Monitoring**

Performance and Monitoring tools are essential in supporting these
testing activities, as they cannot effectively be performed manually.
Examples of these tools include:

-   Dynamic Analysis Tools (D)

-   Performance Testing/Load Testing/Stress Testing Tools

-   Monitoring Tools

**Tool Support for Specialized Testing Needs**

In addition to tools that support the general testing process, there are
many other tools that support more specific testing issues. Examples of
these include tools that focus on data quality assessment, data
conversion and migration, usability testing, accessibility testing,
localization testing and other highly specialized testing activities.

### 6.1.2 Benefits and Risks of Automated Test Tools and Execution

### 

Simply purchasing or leasing a tool does not guarantee success with that
tool. Each type of tool may require additional effort to achieve real
and lasting benefits. There are potential benefits and opportunities
with the use of tools in testing, but there are also risks.

Potential benefits of using automated tools and execution include:

-   Repetitive work is reduced (e.g., running regression tests,
    re-entering the same test data, and checking against
    coding standards)

-   Greater consistency and repeatability (e.g., tests executed by a
    tool in the same order with the same frequency, and tests derived
    from requirements)

-   Objective assessment (e.g., static measures, coverage)

-   Ease of access to information about tests or testing (e.g.,
    statistics and graphs about test progress, incident rates
    and performance)

Risks of using automated tools include:

-   Unrealistic expectations for the tool (including functionality and
    ease of use)

-   Underestimating the time, cost and effort for the initial
    introduction of a tool (including training and external expertise)

-   Underestimating the time and effort needed to achieve significant
    and continuing benefits from the tool (including the need for
    changes in the testing process and continuous improvement of the way
    the tool is used)

-   Underestimating the effort required to maintain the test assets
    generated by the tool

-   Over-reliance on the tool (replacement for test design or use of
    automated testing where manual testing would be better)

-   Neglecting version control of test assets within the tool

-   Neglecting relationships and interoperability issues between
    critical tools, such as requirements management tools, version
    control tools, incident management tools, defect tracking tools and
    tools from multiple vendors

-   Risk of tool vendor going out of business, retiring the tool, or
    selling the tool to a different vendor

-   Poor response from vendor for support, upgrades, and defect fixes

-   Risk of suspension of open-source / free tool project

-   Unforeseen, such as the inability to support a new platform

### 6.1.3 Special Considerations for Some Types of Tools

**Test Execution Tools **

-   Test execution tools execute test objects using automated
    test scripts. This type of tool often requires significant effort in
    order to achieve significant benefits.

-   Capturing tests by recording the actions of a manual tester seems
    attractive, but this approach does not scale to large numbers of
    automated test scripts. A captured script is a linear representation
    with specific data and actions as part of each script. This type of
    script may be unstable when unexpected events occur.

-   A data-driven testing approach separates out the test inputs (the
    data), usually into a spreadsheet, and uses a more generic test
    script that can read the input data and execute the same test script
    with different data. Testers who are not familiar with the scripting
    language can then create the test data for these predefined scripts.

-   In a keyword-driven testing approach, the spreadsheet contains
    keywords describing the actions to be taken (also called action
    words), and test data. Testers (even if they are not familiar with
    the scripting language) can then define tests using the keywords,
    which can be tailored to the application being tested.

-   Technical expertise in the scripting language is needed for all
    approaches (either by testers or by specialists in test automation).

-   Regardless of the scripting technique used, the expected results for
    each test need to be stored for later comparison.

**Static Analysis Tools **

-   Static analysis tools applied to source code can enforce coding
    standards, but if applied to existing code, may generate a large
    quantity of non-critical messages. Warning messages do not stop the
    code from being translated into an executable program, but ideally
    should be addressed so that maintenance of the code is easier in
    the future. A gradual implementation of the analysis tool with
    initial filters to exclude some messages is an effective approach.

**Test Management Tools **

-   Test management tools ideally need to interface with other tools or
    spreadsheets in order to produce useful information in a format that
    fits the needs of the organization.

6.2 Effective Use of Tools
--------------------------

Have an introduction here

### 6.2.1 Main principles for selecting tools 

The main considerations in selecting a tool for an organization include:

-   Assessment of organizational maturity, strengths and weaknesses and
    identification of opportunities for an improved test process
    supported by tools

-   Evaluation against clear requirements and objective criteria

-   A proof-of-concept, by using a test tool during the evaluation phase
    to establish whether it performs effectively with the software under
    test and within the current infrastructure or to identify changes
    needed to that infrastructure to effectively use the tool

-   Evaluation of the vendor (including training, support and
    commercial aspects) or service support suppliers in case of
    non-commercial tools

-   Identification of internal requirements for coaching and mentoring
    in the use of the tool

-   Evaluation of training needs considering the current test team’s
    test automation skills

-   Estimation of a cost-benefit ratio based on a concrete business case

### 6.2.2 Pilot Projects for tool evaluation

Introducing the selected tool into an organization starts with a pilot
project, which has the following objectives:

-   Learn more detail about the tool

-   Evaluate how the tool fits with existing processes and practices,
    and determine what would need to change

-   Decide on standard ways of using, managing, storing and maintaining
    the tool and the test assets (e.g., deciding on naming conventions
    for files and tests, creating libraries and defining the modularity
    of test suites)

-   Assess whether the benefits will be achieved at reasonable cost

### 6.2.3 Success factors for tools in organization

Success factors for evaluation, implementation, deployment, and on-going
support of tools within an organization include:

-   Rolling out the tool to the rest of the organization incrementally

-   Adapting and improving processes to fit with the use of the tool

-   Providing training and coaching/mentoring for new users

-   Defining usage guidelines

-   Implementing a way to gather usage information from the actual use

-   Monitoring tool use and benefits

-   Providing support for the test team for a given tool

-   Gathering lessons learned from all teams

<span id="_Toc378863453" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc378863582" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529608" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529900" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530191" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530481" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167333" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339312" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010486" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126172" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171066" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180111" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207163" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529619" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529911" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530202" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530492" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167344" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339323" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010497" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126183" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171077" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180122" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207174" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529620" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529912" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530203" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530493" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167345" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339324" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010498" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126184" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171078" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180123" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207175" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529621" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529913" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530204" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530494" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167346" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339325" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010499" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126185" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171079" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180124" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207176" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529622" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529914" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530205" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530495" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167347" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339326" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010500" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126186" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171080" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180125" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207177" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529626" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529918" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530209" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530499" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167351" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339330" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010504" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126190" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171084" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180129" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207181" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529634" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529926" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530217" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530507" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167359" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339338" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010512" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126198" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171092" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180137" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207189" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529635" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529927" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530218" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530508" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167360" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339339" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010513" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126199" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171093" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180138" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207190" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102428" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106488" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106729" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984083" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986683" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306528927" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529146" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529641" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529933" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530224" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530514" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167366" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339345" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010519" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126205" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171099" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180144" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207196" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102430" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106490" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106731" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984085" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986685" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306528929" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529148" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529643" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529935" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530226" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530516" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167368" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339347" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010521" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126207" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171101" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180146" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207198" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102433" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106493" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106734" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984088" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986688" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306528932" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529151" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529646" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529938" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530229" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530519" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167371" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339350" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010524" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126210" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171104" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180149" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207201" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102436" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106496" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106737" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984091" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986691" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306528935" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529154" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529649" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529941" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530232" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530522" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167374" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339353" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010527" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126213" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171107" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180152" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207204" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102438" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106498" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106739" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984093" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986693" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306528937" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529156" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529651" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529943" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530234" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530524" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167376" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339355" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010529" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126215" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171109" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180154" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207206" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102442" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106502" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106743" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984097" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986697" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306528941" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529160" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529655" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529947" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530238" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530528" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167380" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339359" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010533" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126219" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171113" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180158" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207210" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102445" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106505" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106746" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984100" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986700" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306528944" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529163" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529658" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529950" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530241" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530531" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167383" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339362" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010536" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126222" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171116" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180161" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207213" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102447" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106507" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106748" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984102" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986702" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306528946" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529165" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529660" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529952" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530243" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530533" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167385" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339364" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010538" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126224" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171118" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180163" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207215" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102457" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106517" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106758" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984112" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986712" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306528956" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529175" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529670" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529962" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530253" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530543" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167395" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339374" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010548" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126234" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171128" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180173" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207225" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102459" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106519" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106760" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984114" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986714" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306528958" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529177" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529672" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529964" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530255" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530545" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167397" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339376" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010550" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126236" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171130" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180175" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207227" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102461" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106521" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106762" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984116" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986716" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306528960" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529179" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529674" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529966" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530257" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530547" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167399" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339378" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010552" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126238" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171132" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180177" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207229" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102463" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106523" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106764" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984118" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986718" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306528962" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529181" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529676" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529968" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530259" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530549" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167401" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339380" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010554" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126240" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171134" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180179" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207231" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102465" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106525" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106766" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984120" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986720" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306528964" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529183" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529678" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529970" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530261" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530551" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167403" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339382" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010556" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126242" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171136" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180181" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207233" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102466" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106526" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106767" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984121" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986721" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306528965" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529184" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529679" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529971" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530262" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530552" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167404" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339383" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010557" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126243" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171137" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180182" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207234" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102467" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106527" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106768" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984122" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986722" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306528966" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529185" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529680" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529972" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530263" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530553" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167405" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339384" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010558" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126244" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171138" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180183" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207235" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102472" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106532" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106773" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984127" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986727" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306528971" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529190" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529685" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529977" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530268" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530558" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167410" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339389" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010563" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126249" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171143" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180188" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207240" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102473" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106533" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106774" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984128" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986728" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306528972" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529191" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529686" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529978" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530269" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530559" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167411" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339390" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010564" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126250" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171144" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180189" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207241" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102474" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106534" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106775" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984129" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986729" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306528973" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529192" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529687" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529979" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530270" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530560" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167412" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339391" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010565" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126251" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171145" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180190" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207242" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102478" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106538" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106779" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984133" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986733" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306528977" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529196" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529691" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529983" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530274" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530564" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167416" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339395" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010569" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126255" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171149" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180194" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207246" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102480" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106540" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106781" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984135" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986735" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306528979" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529198" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529693" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529985" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530276" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530566" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167418" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339397" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010571" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126257" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171151" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180196" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207248" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102488" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106548" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106789" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984143" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986743" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306528987" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529206" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529701" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529993" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530284" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530574" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167426" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339405" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010579" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126265" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171159" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180204" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207256" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102490" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106550" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106791" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984145" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986745" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306528989" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529208" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529703" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529995" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530286" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530576" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167428" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339407" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010581" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126267" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171161" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180206" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207258" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102491" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106551" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106792" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984146" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986746" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306528990" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529209" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529704" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529996" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530287" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530577" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167429" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339408" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010582" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126268" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171162" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180207" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207259" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102492" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106552" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106793" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984147" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986747" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306528991" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529210" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529705" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529997" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530288" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530578" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167430" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339409" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010583" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126269" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171163" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180208" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207260" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102499" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106559" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106800" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984154" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986754" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306528998" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529217" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529712" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530004" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530295" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530585" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167437" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339416" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010590" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126276" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171170" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180215" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207267" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102501" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106561" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106802" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984156" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986756" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529000" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529219" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529714" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530006" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530297" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530587" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167439" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339418" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010592" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126278" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171172" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180217" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207269" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102508" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106568" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106809" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984163" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986763" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529007" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529226" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529721" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530013" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530304" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530594" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167446" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339425" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010599" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126285" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171179" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180224" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207276" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102510" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106570" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106811" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984165" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986765" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529009" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529228" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529723" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530015" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530306" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530596" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167448" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339427" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010601" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126287" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171181" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180226" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207278" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102512" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106572" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106813" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984167" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986767" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529011" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529230" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529725" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530017" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530308" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530598" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167450" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339429" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010603" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126289" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171183" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180228" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207280" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102513" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106573" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106814" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984168" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986768" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529012" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529231" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529726" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530018" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530309" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530599" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167451" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339430" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010604" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126290" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171184" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180229" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207281" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102515" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106575" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106816" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984170" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986770" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529014" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529233" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529728" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530020" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530311" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530601" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167453" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339432" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010606" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126292" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171186" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180231" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207283" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102517" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106577" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106818" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984172" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986772" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529016" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529235" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529730" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530022" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530313" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530603" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167455" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339434" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010608" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126294" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171188" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180233" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207285" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102527" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106587" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106828" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984182" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986782" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529026" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529245" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529740" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530032" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530323" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530613" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167465" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339444" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010618" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126304" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171198" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180243" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207295" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102529" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106589" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106830" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984184" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986784" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529028" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529247" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529742" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530034" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530325" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530615" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167467" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339446" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010620" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126306" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171200" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180245" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207297" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102531" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106591" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106832" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984186" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986786" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529030" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529249" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529744" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530036" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530327" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530617" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167469" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339448" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010622" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126308" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171202" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180247" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207299" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102533" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106593" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106834" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984188" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986788" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529032" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529251" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529746" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530038" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530329" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530619" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167471" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339450" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010624" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126310" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171204" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180249" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207301" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102535" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106595" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106836" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984190" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986790" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529034" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529253" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529748" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530040" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530331" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530621" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167473" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339452" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010626" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126312" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171206" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180251" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207303" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102538" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106598" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106839" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984193" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986793" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529037" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529256" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529751" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530043" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530334" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530624" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167476" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339455" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010629" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126315" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171209" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180254" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207306" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102550" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106610" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106851" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984205" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986805" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529049" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529268" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529763" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530055" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530346" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530636" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167488" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339467" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010641" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126327" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171221" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180266" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207318" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102552" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106612" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106853" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984207" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986807" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529051" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529270" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529765" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530057" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530348" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530638" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167490" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339469" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010643" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126329" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171223" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180268" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207320" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299102557" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106617" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299106858" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302984212" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc302986812" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529056" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529275" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306529770" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530062" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530353" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc306530643" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307167495" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc314339474" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315010648" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315126334" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315171228" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315180273" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc315207325" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc329029215" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc329029830" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc322077089" class="anchor"></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span></span>Index 
=======================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================

acceptance tests, 10

black-box testing, 20

interoperability testing, 21

user story, 9
